>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, AUGUST 30:
EUROPEAN LEADERS AT ODDS OVER
THE GROWING MIGRANT CRISIS.
ALSO, NEW RESEARCH REVEALS
TRAUMA EXPERIENCED BY HOLOCAUST
SURVIVORS CAN ALTER THE BODY
CHEMISTRY OF THEIR CHILDREN.
>> ALL I KNEW WAS THAT WE WERE
DIFFERENT, THAT I WAS DIFFERENT.
I DIDN'T EXACTLY KNOW WHY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND, REMEMBERING
OLIVER SACKS.
>> WE SEE WITH THE EYES BUT
WE SEE WITH THE BRAIN AS WELL.
AND SEEING WITH THE BRAIN IS
OFTEN CALLED IMAGINATION.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
EUROPEAN OFFICIALS ARE CALLING
FOR AN EMERGENCY MEETING TO
ADDRESS THE CONTINENT'S GROWING
MIGRANT CRISIS.
INTERIOR MINISTERS FROM FRANCE,
GERMANY, AND BRITAIN ARE CALLING
FOR A UNIFIED PLAN AND FAIRER
DISTRIBUTION OF MORE THAN
300,000 MIGRANTS WHO HAVE POURED
INTO EUROPE THIS YEAR.
MORE THAN 100,000 HAVE ARRIVED
IN THE PAST MONTH, MAINLY FROM
AFRICA AND THE MIDDLE EAST,
OFTEN FLEEING WAR-TORN SYRIA
AND LIBYA.
THE MIGRANTS TYPICALLY ARRIVE BY
BOAT IN GREECE AND ITALY, AND
THEN TRAVEL OVERLAND.
ITALY'S COAST GUARD RESCUED
1,600 MIGRANTS THIS WEEKEND.
SEVEN MIGRANTS DROWNED TODAY OFF
THE COAST OF LIBYA AFTER THEIR
BOAT CAPSIZED IN THE
MEDITERRANEAN SEA.
MORE THAN 2,500 MIGRANTS HAVE
DIED THIS YEAR TRYING TO MAKE
THE CROSSING.
GERMANY TODAY CALLED ON
COUNTRIES TO ACCEPT MORE
MIGRANTS.
IT EXPECTS TO RECEIVE 800,000
ASYLUM SEEKERS BY YEAR'S END.
THE FRENCH FOREIGN MINISTER SAID
TODAY IT IS "SCANDALOUS" THAT
SOME EASTERN EUROPEAN COUNTRIES
ARE REFUSING TO TAKE IN
MIGRANTS.
>> (translated): WITH REGARD
TO ALL THOSE PEOPLE WHO ARE
POLITICALLY CHASED OUT OF THEIR
COUNTRY AND WHO ARE IN WAR-TORN
COUNTRIES, WE HAVE TO BE ABLE TO
WELCOME THEM.
IT'S CALLED THE PLEA FOR ASYLUM,
AND EVERY COUNTRY HAS TO RESPOND
TO THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: HUNGARY HAS NOW
ARRESTED A FIFTH SUSPECT FOR THE
DEATHS OF 71 SMUGGLED MIGRANTS
FOUND DEAD IN A TRUCK ABANDONED
IN AUSTRIA LAST WEEK.
THE EUROPEAN UNION MEETING IS
SCHEDULED FOR SEPTEMBER 14.
JAPAN IS SEEING MASSIVE
DEMONSTRATIONS AGAINST A PLAN TO
ALLOW JAPANESE TROOPS TO FIGHT
OVERSEAS FOR THE FIRST TIME
SINCE WORLD WAR TWO.
TENS OF THOUSANDS OF PROTESTERS
MARCHED TODAY OUTSIDE THE
JAPANESE PARLIAMENT, WHICH IS
CONSIDERING LEGISLATION THAT
WOULD ALLOW TROOPS TO DEPLOY TO
DEFEND AN ALLY.
THE JAPANESE CONSTITUTION ALLOWS
TROOPS ONLY TO ENGAGE IN SELF-
DEFENSE, IF JAPAN ITSELF WERE
ATTACKED.
PRIME MINISTER SHINZO ABE IS
PUSHING FOR THE CHANGE, THOUGH.
POLLS SHOW A MAJORITY OF
JAPANESE OPPOSE IT.
A FINAL VOTE IS EXPECTED NEXT
MONTH.
DR. OLIVER SACKS, A NEUROLOGIST
AND AUTHOR, WHO HAS BEEN CALLED
THE POET LAUREATE OF MEDICINE,
DIED TODAY OF CANCER AT HIS HOME
IN NEW YORK.
>> I AM A STORYTELLER, FOR
BETTER AND FOR WORSE.
>> Reporter: OLIVER SACKS WAS
BOTH A PATH-BREAKING RESEARCHER
AND A BEST-SELLING AUTHOR-- A
SCHOLAR OF THE BRAIN AND
CONSCIOUSNESS, WHO HAD A GIFT
FOR EXPLAINING HOW WE PERCEIVE
THE WORLD AROUND US.
>> WE SEE WITH THE EYES, BUT WE
SEE WITH THE BRAIN AS WELL.
AND SEEING WITH THE BRAIN IS
OFTEN CALLED IMAGINATION.
>> Reporter: OFTEN DRAWING ON
HIS OWN EXPERIENCE WITH
PATIENTS, SACKS PENNED MORE THAN
A DOZEN BOOKS THAT SOLD MILLIONS
OF COPIES."
THE MAN WHO MISTOOK HIS WIFE
FOR A HAT" WAS ONE OF HIS BEST
SELLERS.
HE EXPLORED AUTISM, COLOR
BLINDNESS, DEAFNESS, TOURETTE'S,
ASPERGER'S, AND PARKINSON'S."
AWAKENINGS," HIS BOOK ABOUT
ENCEPHALITIS PATIENTS WHO
MIRACULOUSLY, BUT BRIEFLY,
REGAINED THEIR MENTAL ACUITY,
WAS MADE INTO A MOVIE.
ROBIN WILLIAMS PLAYED SACKS.
SACKS SPOKE TO THE NEWSHOUR IN
1989.
>> I'M ADDICTED TO PATIENTS.
I CAN'T DO WITHOUT THEM.
I NEED TO HAVE THE FEELING OF
THESE OTHER LIVES WHICH BECOME
PART OF MY OWN.
>> Reporter: BORN IN LONDON TO
PARENTS WHO WERE DOCTORS, HE
WENT TO MEDICAL SCHOOL IN
ENGLAND, INTERNED IN CALIFORNIA,
AND PRACTICED IN NEW YORK.
SIX MONTHS AGO, HE REVEALED HE
WAS IN THE LATE STAGES OF
TERMINAL MELANOMA.
HIS FINAL BOOK, THE MEMOIR "ON
THE MOVE," WAS PUBLISHED EARLIER
THIS YEAR.
>> OVER A LIFETIME, I HAVE
WRITTEN MILLIONS OF WORDS, BUT
THE ACT OF WRITING SEEMS AS
FRESH AND AS MUCH FUN AS WHEN I
STARTED IT NEARLY 70 YEARS AGO.
>> Reporter: OLIVER SACKS WAS
82.
>> Sreenivasan: NOW ONLINE, A
LOOK BACK AT THE MOMENT OLIVER
SACKS LEARNED HE HAD TERMINAL
CANCER, AND WHAT HE TAUGHT US
ABOUT COMING FACE-TO-FACE WITH
DEATH.
VISIT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: LEBANON HAS SEEN
MASS PROTESTS AGAIN THIS
WEEKEND.
THOUSANDS GATHERED IN THE
CAPITAL CITY OF BEIRUT YESTERDAY
TO DEMAND CHANGES IN THE
GOVERNMENT, AND HAVE THE GARBAGE
PICKED UP, SOMETHING THAT HASN'T
HAPPENED IN A MONTH.
PROTESTERS CALL THEIR CAMPAIGN"
YOU STINK."
LEBANON IS A COUNTRY OF 4.5
MILLION PEOPLE, WITHOUT A
PRESIDENT, WITHOUT LEGISLATIVE
ELECTIONS FOR SIX YEARS, AND
WITH A GOVERNMENT MANY DESCRIBE
AS DYSFUNCTIONAL.
JOINING ME NOW VIA SKYPE FROM
BEIRUT IS "WASHINGTON POST"
REPORTER LIZ SLY.
LIZ EVEN SETTING UP THIS
INTERVIEW, IT'S DIFFICULT,
YOU'VE HAD POWER OUTAGES.
BUT THESE POWER OUTAGES, WATER
CUTS, THIS ALL SEEMS NORMAL FOR
THE AVERAGE LEBANESE CITIZEN.
>> YES, THAT'S RIGHT.
THE INFRASTRUCTURE IS BREAKING
DOWN AND PEOPLE HAVE HAD ENOUGH.
>> AND HOW IS THIS DYSFUNCTION
DEALING WITH THE INFLUX OF
REFUGEES THAT YOU HAVE COMING IN
FROM SYRIA AND OTHER PLACES?
>> THERE IS A TANGENTIAL
CONNECTION WITH THE REFUGEES.
THE REFUGEES HAVE SWELLED THE
POPULATION OF LEBANON.
THIS IS A COUNTRY OF 4 MILLION
PEOPLE.
1.1 MILLION REFUGEES REGISTERED
WITH THE GOVERNMENT.
PEOPLE WORKING HERE COMING HERE
FOR WHATEVER REASON ARE NOT
REGISTERED BUT THEY ARE ALSO
FLEEING THE WAR.
AND BASICALLY YOU HAVE BETWEEN A
QUARTER AND A THIRST OF THE
POPULATION FROM SYRIA.
THE DYSFUNCTION OF THE
GOVERNMENT AND THE CORRUPTION
THAT PARALYZES THE GOVERNMENT,
MAKES IT UNABLE TO MAKE
DECISIONS THAT NEED TO BE TAKEN
TO MOVE THE COUNTRY FORWARD TO
KEEP THE SERVICES GOING AND
BASICALLY TO KEEP THIS COUNTRY
RUNNING.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT HAPPENS
NEXT?
THEY SAID THE PROTESTS WOULD
ESCALATE IF THEY DIDN'T GET THE
TRASH PICKUP GOING.
>> THE CALLS AREN'T THAT
ENORMOUS.
THEY ARE GENUINE PEOPLE OUT
THERE DEMONSTRATING.
THEY GENUINELY HOPE THEY CAN
CHANGE THE SYSTEM BY GOING ON
TOOT STREETS.
THIS COUNTRY IS STUCK IN A
SITUATION OF SECTARIAN POLITICS
QUOTAS RIVALRIES THAT GIVE
EVERYONE A STAKE IN THE WAY THE
GOVERNMENT IS ALREADY RUN, WHICH
DOESN'T SEEM ENOUGH TO BRING THE
KIND OF IMPETUS WE SAW IN TAHRIR
SQUARE IN EGYPT THAT KICKED THE
COUNTRY INTO CIVIL WAR, ON THE
FRINGES OF THE WIDER SYSTEM THAT
MOST PEOPLE REMAIN LOCKED INTO.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, LIZ
SLY OF THE WASHINGTON POST
JOINING US BY PHONE VIA SKYPE.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: IN OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT TONIGHT, WE LOOK AT THIS
QUESTION: CAN TRAUMA AFFECTING A
PARENT BE PASSED ON TO A CHILD?
NEW RESEARCH ON HOLOCAUST
SURVIVORS SHOWS CATASTROPHIC
EVENTS CAN ALTER OUR BODY
CHEMISTRY AND THOSE CHANGES CAN
BE TRANSMITTED TO CHILDREN.
THE RESULT: CHILDREN MAY SUFFER
THE EFFECTS OF A TRAUMATIC EVENT
THEY NEVER WITNESSED OR
EXPERIENCED.
THE NEWSHOUR'S STEPHEN FEE
REPORTS.
>> Reporter: 59-YEAR-OLD KAREN
SONNEBERG GREW UP ON THE NORTH
SHORE OF LONG ISLAND, JUST AN
HOUR'S DRIVE FROM NEW YORK CITY.
HER PARENTS SURVIVED THE
HOLOCAUST BUT RARELY MENTIONED
IT.
>> ALL I KNEW WAS THAT WE WERE
DIFFERENT, THAT I WAS DIFFERENT.
I DIDN'T EXACTLY KNOW WHY.
>> Reporter: HER PARENTS WERE
JEWISH, BORN IN GERMANY, BUT
AFTER HITLER CAME TO POWER,
THEIR FAMILIES FLED.
SONNEBERG'S PARENTS WERE JUST
CHILDREN BUT CARRIED THE TRAUMAS
OF NAZI OPPRESSION THROUGHOUT
THEIR LIVES.
>> MY MOTHER FROM THE TIME SHE
WAS THREE ON, FOR MY FATHER,
FROM THE TIME HE WAS FIVE OR
SIX-YEARS-OLD, HE WAS SUBJECTED
TO THE PAINFUL EXISTENCE IN
GERMANY.
>> Reporter: DESPITE HER OWN
COMFORTABLE UPBRINGING HERE IN
THE U.S., SONNEBERG PRIVATELY
STRUGGLED FOR YEARS WITH ANXIETY
AND STRESS.
WHILE SHE COULDN'T PROVE IT, SHE
BELIEVED IT WAS SOMEHOW LINKED
TO HER PARENTS' TRAUMATIC
CHILDHOODS.
>> HAVING DISCUSSED THIS WITH
MANY OF MY FRIENDS WHO COME FROM
SIMILAR BACKGROUNDS, IT SEEMS TO
BE CONSISTENT IN MOST OF US, OR
THERE WERE DEFINITELY CHALLENGES
THAT "AMERICAN" KIDS DIDN'T SEEM
TO HAVE EXPERIENCED.
>> Reporter: EVEN THOUGH YOU
WEREN'T THERE.
>> EXACTLY.
THAT'S THE AMAZING PART OF IT.
>> Reporter: NOW, A NEW STUDY
PUBLISHED THIS MONTH IN THE
SCIENTIFIC JOURNAL "BIOLOGICAL
PSYCHIATRY," BOLSTERS
SONNEBERG'S BELIEF THAT SHE
EXPERIENCED THE AFTER EFFECTS OF
HER PARENTS' TRAUMA.
DR. RACHEL YEHUDA, DIRECTOR OF
MOUNT SINAI'S TRAUMATIC STRESS
STUDIES DIVISION LED THE STUDY.
HER TEAM INTERVIEWED AND DREW
BLOOD FROM 32 SETS OF SURVIVORS
AND THEIR CHILDREN, FOCUSING ON
A GENE CALLED FKBP5
>> WE ALREADY KNOW THAT THIS IS
A GENE THAT CONTRIBUTES TO RISK
FOR DEPRESSION AND POST-
TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER.
>> Reporter: YEHUDA NOTICED A
PATTERN AMONG THE HOLOCAUST
SURVIVORS CALLED AN EPIGENETIC
CHANGE-- NOT A CHANGE IN THE
GENE ITSELF, BUT RATHER A CHANGE
IN A CHEMICAL MARKER ATTACHED TO
IT.
>> WHEN WE LOOKED AT THEIR OWN
CHILDREN, THEIR CHILDREN ALSO
HAD AN EPIGENETIC CHANGE IN THE
SAME SPOT ON A STRESS-RELATED
GENE.
>> Reporter: WHAT DOES THAT
SUGGEST?
>> WELL, IN THE FIRST
GENERATION, IN THE HOLOCAUST
SURVIVOR, IT SUGGESTS THAT THERE
HAS BEEN AN ADAPTATION OR A
RESPONSE TO A HORRENDOUS
ENVIRONMENTAL EVENT, AND IN THE
SECOND GENERATION IT SUGGESTS
THAT THERE HAS ALSO BEEN A
RESPONSE OF THE OFFSPRING TO
THIS PARENTAL TRAUMA.
>> Reporter: WHICH MEANS
CHILDREN OF HOLOCAUST SURVIVORS
LIKE SONNEBERG COULD BE MORE
LIKELY TO DEVELOP STRESS OR
ANXIETY DISORDERS.
THOUGH THEIR STUDY WAS SMALL,
YEHUDA AND HER TEAM CONTROLLED
FOR ANY EARLY TRAUMA THE
SURVIVORS' CHILDREN MAY HAVE
EXPERIENCED THEMSELVES.
HOW IS IT THAT A PARENT WHO WAS
SUBJECTED TO THE TRAUMA OF THE
HOLOCAUST IS ABLE TO SOMEHOW
TRANSMIT THAT TO A CHILD WHO
WASN'T THERE?
>> THAT'S A REALLY GOOD
QUESTION, AND THIS STUDY THAT WE
DID DOESN'T ADDRESS THE HOW.
THE STUDY THAT WE DID JUST
PROVIDES A PROOF OF CONCEPT THAT
WE MIGHT BE ABLE TO IDENTIFY THE
HOW IF WE DO MORE RESEARCH.
>> Reporter: D.N.A. IS PASSED
FROM PARENTS TO CHILDREN.
BUT RESEARCH LIKE YEHUDA'S
SUGGESTS PARENTAL LIFE
EXPERIENCES CAN MODIFY THEIR
BODY CHEMISTRY, AND THOSE
MODIFICATIONS CAN BE TRANSMITTED
TO CHILDREN AS WELL.
SCIENTISTS HAVE EXAMINED THIS
IDEA BEFORE.
AFTER A FAMINE IN HOLLAND DURING
1944 AND 1945, CHILDREN WERE
BORN WITH THE EFFECTS OF
MALNUTRITION TWO GENERATIONS
AFTER THE FOOD SHORTAGE ENDED.
PREVIOUSLY, YEHUDA HERSELF
STUDIED STRESS HORMONE LEVELS IN
CHILDREN BORN TO WOMEN WHO
SURVIVED THE SEPTEMBER 11
TERRORIST ATTACKS.
SHE'S BEEN EXAMINING THE LINK
BETWEEN TRAUMA EXPERIENCED BY
HOLOCAUST SURVIVORS AND THEIR
CHILDREN FOR MORE THAN 20 YEARS.
>> A TRAUMA IS AN EVENT THAT
CHANGES YOU.
IT DOESN'T HAVE TO CHANGE YOU
FOR THE NEGATIVE.
TRAUMA CHANGES YOU IN LOTS OF
DIFFERENT WAYS, BUT MOST PEOPLE
WHO EXPERIENCE EXTREME TRAUMA
LEARN A GREAT DEAL FROM THAT
EXPERIENCE, AND SOME OF THOSE
LESSONS MAY BE LESSONS THAT ARE
TRANSMITTED TO THE CHILD, AND
THAT'S NOT A BAD THING.
>> Reporter: YEHUDA SAYS THE
IMPLICATIONS AREN'T LIMITED TO
HOLOCAUST SURVIVORS.
BUT THIS DWINDLING POPULATION
PROVIDES INSIGHT INTO HOW
CLINICIANS UNDERSTAND AND TREAT
STRESS DISORDERS.
>> IF YOU'RE AT RISK FOR HEART
DISEASE, A LOT OF TIMES THE
DOCTOR CAN SEPARATE OUT WELL
THIS IS YOUR WEIGHT, THAT'S NOT
GOOD, THIS IS YOUR DIET, THESE
ARE YOU GENETIC RISKS, AND
THINGS LIKE THAT.
AND IT WOULD BE VERY NICE IF WE
COULD DEVELOP A SIMILAR RISK
PROFILE IN THE MENTAL HEALTH
ARENA WHERE WE WOULD BE ABLE TO
UNDERSTAND WHERE THE RISK
FACTORS COME FROM FOR DEPRESSION
AND ANXIETY.
>> Reporter: WE'RE ON THE 10th
ANNIVERSARY OF HURRICANE
KATRINA.
THERE WERE CHILDREN WHO WERE
BORN AFTER THAT TRAUMA.
THERE ARE CHILDREN BORN IN THE
TRAUMA OF A WAR IN SYRIA AND
OTHER CRISES AROUND THE WORLD.
IF YOU'RE THE CHILD OF A PARENT
WHO EXPERIENCED TRAUMA, ARE YOU
DOOMED TO BE DEPRESSED OR
STRESSED FOR THE REST OF YOUR
LIFE?
>> I DON'T THINK YOU'RE DOOMED.
BUT I THINK THAT MANY CHILDREN
OF TRAUMATIZED PARENTS HAVE
STRUGGLED WITH DEPRESSION AND
ANXIETY.
AND I CAN TELL YOU THAT MANY OF
THEM HAVE FELT RELIEVED THAT
THERE MIGHT BE A CONTRIBUTING
FACTOR THAT HAS BEEN BASED ON
HOW THEY'RE RESPONDING TO THEIR
PARENTAL TRAUMA.
I THINK THAT IT'S HELPED PEOPLE
WORK THROUGH A LOT OF THAT
DEPRESSION AND ANXIETY.
>> Reporter: RELIEF IS EXACTLY
WHAT KAREN SONNEBERG, THE CHILD
OF HOLOCAUST SURVIVORS, FELT
AFTER SHE PARTICIPATED IN ONE OF
DR. YEHUDA'S TRAUMA SURVIVOR
STUDIES.
SHE LOST HER MOTHER 30 YEARS AGO
BUT LOOKS FORWARD TO HER
FATHER'S 90th BIRTHDAY NEXT
YEAR.
>> I LEARNED TO COPE IN MY LIFE.
I'VE LEARNED TO MOVE ON AND GET
OVER ALL OF THIS.
HAD I KNOWN AT THE TIME HOW MY
REACTIONS COULD IMPACT FUTURE
CHILDREN, MY CHILDREN'S
REACTIONS, I MIGHT'VE DEALT WITH
THINGS DIFFERENTLY OR GOTTEN
THEM SOME SORT OF TREATMENT THAT
MAYBE WOULD HELP THEM IN THE
FUTURE.
>> Sreenivasan: OUR NEXT STORY
IS ABOUT A PROVOCATIVE
PHOTOGRAPHER FROM SOUTH AFRICA,
WHERE HUMAN RIGHTS GROUPS SAY,
EVERY WEEK THERE ARE AS MANY AS
10 ATTACKS ON GAYS AND LESBIANS
BECAUSE OF THEIR SEXUAL
ORIENTATION.
PHOTOGRAPHER ZANELE MUHOLI, A
SELF-PROCLAIMED VISUAL ACTIVIST,
IS TRYING TO RAISE AWARENESS OF
THE PROBLEM.
HER WORK IS NOW ON DISPLAY IN AN
EXHIBIT AT THE BROOKLYN MUSEUM
THAT RUNS THROUGH NOVEMBER.
THE NEWSHOUR'S TRACY WHOLF HAS
THE STORY.
>> Reporter: ZANELE MUHOLI'S
WORK FOCUSES PRIMARILY ON THE
BLACK LESBIAN EXPERIENCE: FROM
MOMENTS OF CELEBRATION AND JOY,
TO INTIMATE PORTRAITS AND
STORIES THAT DEPICT THE VIOLENCE
MANY GAY SOUTH AFRICANS
EXPERIENCE.
EVERYTHING FROM CORRECTIVE RAPE,
WHERE LESBIAN ARE SEXUALLY
ASSAULTED BY MEN WHO WANT TO,
"TURN THEM STRAIGHT," TO MURDER.
ARE YOU CONCERNED ABOUT
REPERCUSSIONS AGAINST YOUR OWN
FAMILY FOR THE WORK THAT YOU DO?
>> UNFORTUNATELY, A LOT OF
INNOCENT SOULS HAVE BEEN KILLED
WITHOUT EVEN DOING ANYTHING AT
ALL.
BUT THEN IF ANYTHING HAPPENS TO
ME, AT LEAST I'LL DIE, YOU KNOW,
PEACEFULLY, BECAUSE I'LL KNOW
THAT I'VE ACTED TO CHALLENGE ANY
PHOBIAS THAT STILL PERSIST.
>> Reporter: CATHERINE MORRIS IS
THE CURATOR OF MUHOLI'S EXHIBIT
AT THE BROOKLYN MUSEUM.
>> ZANELE'S ENGAGEMENT WITH HER
COMMUNITY IS COUPLED WITH HER
EXTRAORDINARY PHOTOGRAPHIC
TALENT.
SHE IS SIMULTANEOUSLY
DOCUMENTING HER COMMUNITY, BUT
AT THE SAME TIME SPEAKING VERY
ELOQUENTLY ABOUT THE HISTORY OF
PHOTOGRAPHY AND HISTORY OF
PORTRAITURE.
AND THESE BLACK AND WHITE
PHOTOGRAPHS RESONATE ON SO MANY
LEVELS BECAUSE OF THAT PUSH-PULL
BETWEEN THE HISTORY THAT SHE'S
CAPTURING AND THE COMMUNITY
SHE'S COMMITTED TO.
>> Reporter: MUHOLI STRUGGLED
WITH HER OWN IDENTITY AS A BLACK
LESBIAN AND EVEN HAD THOUGHTS OF
SUICIDE WHEN SHE WAS YOUNGER,
BUT SOMEONE GAVE HER A POINT-
AND-SHOOT CAMERA, AND SHE BEGAN
TAKING SELF-PORTRAITS AND FOUND
IT TO BE THERAPEUTIC.
>> I'M ONE OF THOSE PEOPLE WHO
REALLY DOESN'T MIND TO
PHOTOGRAPH THE SELF, YOU KNOW?
AND I THINK IT'S THE RIGHT THING
TO DO.
IT'S VERY, VERY IMPORTANT FOR US
TO LOOK AT US BEFORE WE LOOK AT
WHAT IS HAPPENING IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> Reporter: MUHOLI'S PORTRAIT
SERIES CALLED "FACES AND PHASES"
IS A COLLECTION OF INTIMATE
PHOTOS SHE'S TAKEN OF FRIENDS
AND ACQUAINTANCES, PEOPLE SHE
REFERS TO AS COLLABORATORS.
WHAT ARE YOU LOOKING FOR WHEN
YOU'RE SETTING UP A SHOT, AND
YOU'RE WORKING WITH A
COLLABORATOR?
>> I'M LOOKING FOR ME.
YOU KNOW, WHEN SOME PEOPLE SAY,
"YOU LOOK AT SOMEONE, AND YOU
SEE YOURSELF IN THEM," I'M
LOOKING FOR ME THAT I NEVER WAS.
SO I'M LOOKING FOR THE PERSON,
THAT PERSON WHO LIES IN EACH AND
EVERY ONE OF US NO MATTER WHAT.
>> Reporter: DESPITE GAY RIGHTS
BEING PROTECTED BY LAW IN SOUTH
AFRICA, ATTACKS AGAINST BLACK
LESBIANS ARE OFTEN OVERLOOKED
AND UNDER INVESTIGATED BY
AUTHORITIES, ACCORDING TO HUMAN
RIGHTS GROUPS.
>> IT'S MUCH HARDER TO BE A
BLACK LESBIAN IN SOUTH AFRICA
THAN IT IS TO BE A WHITE
LESBIAN.
>> Reporter: ROSALIND MORRIS IS
A PROFESSOR OF ANTHROPOLOGY AT
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY.
>> VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN IS NOT
UNCOMMON.
SO, ONE FINDS A KIND OF
INTENSIFICATION OF THAT VIOLENCE
DIRECTED AGAINST BLACK WOMEN FOR
NOT CONFORMING TO IDEALS OF
FEMININITY, ON ONE HAND, AND FOR
APPEARING TO BETRAY A BLACK
CULTURAL OR A BLACK NATIONAL
CAUSE.
>> Reporter: WHILE MUHOLI'S WORK
HAS BEEN CELEBRATED AND EMBRACED
BY ART CRITICS AROUND THE WORLD,
SOME OF HER MORE EXPLICIT AND
REVEALING PHOTOGRAPHS HAVE LED
CONSERVATIVE POLITICIANS IN
SOUTH AFRICA TO CRITICIZE HER
WORK, CALLING IT IMMORAL AND
OFFENSIVE.
YOUR WORK HAS BEEN MET WITH
CRITICISM OR CONTROVERSY.
HOW DO YOU RESPOND TO THOSE
STATEMENTS, THOSE SENTIMENTS,
THAT PUSH BACK?
>> WHEN I'M BEING CALLED A BLACK
LESBIAN CONTROVERSIAL
PHOTOGRAPHER, THEY BASICALLY
SAY, "CONTINUE TO DO IT, BECAUSE
YOU ARE DOING THE RIGHT THING."
>> Sreenivasan: ABOUT 40 MILLION
AMERICANS WEAR CONTACT LENSES TO
CORRECT THEIR VISION, AND HOW
MUCH THE LENSES COST IS NOW THE
SUBJECT OF A COURTROOM BATTLE.
A RECENT FEDERAL APPEALS COURT
RULING TEMPORARILY ALLOWS
DISCOUNTERS LIKE "1-800-
CONTACTS" TO CHARGE LESS THAN
THE LARGEST LENS MANUFACTURERS
WOULD PREFER.
THE LENS MAKERS DON'T WANT EYE
DOCTORS WHO SELL CONTACTS TO BE
UNDERCUT BY DISCOUNTERS WHO GO
BELOW A SUGGESTED MINIMUM PRICE.
AT STAKE IS $4 BILLION AMERICANS
SPEND ON CONTACT LENSES.
YESTERDAY, I SPOKE WITH
ASSOCIATED PRESS REPORTER
LINDSAY WHITEHURST, WHO IS
COVERING THE CASE.
>> $4 BILLION IS A BIG AMOUNT.
40 MILLION AMERICANS USING
CONTACT LENSES IS SOMETHING WE
ALL TAKE FOR GRANTED.
WHAT HAPPENED IN THIS SPECIFIC
CASE?
>> SO IN THIS CASE THE STATE OF
UTAH ACTUALLY PASSED A LAW THAT
BANNED MINIMUM PRICES FOR
CONTACT LENSES SO TOLD
MANUFACTURERS YOU CAN NO LONGER
SET MINIMUM PRICES FOR YOUR
PRODUCTS.
THE MANUFACTURERS IN THEIR ARE A
FEW BIG MANUFACTURERS THAT
REALLY DOMINATE THIS INDUSTRY,
TOLD RESELLERS IF YOU SELL OUR
PRODUCTS BELOW THIS, WE WILL
YANK OUR PRODUCTS, WE WON'T SELL
TO YOU ANY MORE.
THIS PARTICULARLY AFFECTED
DISCOUNT SELLERS LIKE COSTCO AND
1-800-CONTACTS WHICH HAPPEN TO
BE BASED IN UTAH.
Sreenivasan: OPTOMETRISTS CAN
ACTUALLY SELL YOU STUFFER TOO.
>> THEY CAN INTRODUCE PATIENTS
TO NEW PRODUCTS.
THEY CAN SAY THIS PRODUCT FROM
JOHNSON AND JOHNSON JUST CAME ON
THE MARKET, I THINK IT WOULD BE
GREAT FOR YOU.
DISCOUNT BUSINESSES WON'T
SUGGEST NEW PRODUCTS.
EYE DOCTORS ARE ESSENTIAL TO THE
MANUFACTURERS, AND MANUFACTURERS
WANT TO MAKE SURE EYE DOCTORS
AREN'T LOSING BUSINESS.
>> THE MANUFACTURERS AND THE EYE
DOCTORS LISTEN.
1-800-CONTACTS AND COSTCO DON'T
HAVE THE EXPERTISE I DO WHEN I
SELL YOU SOMETHING.
>> HOW TO PUT THEM IN YOUR
AND IT'S SERGE A MEDICAL THING
THERE'S DEFINITELY SOMETHING TO
THAT.
CONTACTS CAN GET KIND OF
EXPENSIVE SO CUSTOMERS ARE
LOOKING FOR WAYS TO SAVE A
LITTLE MONEY AND THEY'RE LOOKING
TO PLACES LIKE 1-800-CONTACTS.
THEY HAVE ACTUALLY BEEN ABLE TO
CAPTURE A CERTAIN PERCENT OF
THIS BUSINESS NOW.
Sreenivasan: WHAT IS THE STATE
OF PAY?
>> SOME OF THE MANUFACTURERS
HAVE LOWERED THE MINIMUMS, THIS
LAW ONLY APPLIES IN UTAH BUT
BECAUSE 1-800-CONTACTS IS BASED
HERE THEY CAN SELL ANYWHERE IN
THE COUNTRY.
THOSE TRANSACTIONS IF YOU ARE IN
NEW YORK OR IN MONTANA AND YOU
BUY CONTACTS ONLINE FROM
1-800-CONTACTS THAT'S CONSIDERED
AN IN-STATE TRANSACTION.
NO MATTER WHERE THE CUSTOMER IS
AND THIS IS REALLY CENTRAL TO
THE PROBLEM MANUFACTURERS ARE
BASING THEIR APPEAL ON OR THE
ARGUMENT THEY'RE BASING THEIR
APPEAL ON IS THEY'RE SAYING THIS
VIOLATES INTERSTATE COMMERCE
RULE AND SO FAR THIS HASN'T
GAINED A LOT OF TRACTION IN THE
COURTS BUT IT'S REALLY AN
INTERESTING IDEA, INTERESTING
CONCEPT IN THE AGE WHERE PEOPLE
BUY A LOT OF THINGS ONLINE
HYPOTHESIS.
Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
LINDSAY WHITEHURST JOINING US
FROM THE ASSOCIATED PRESS.
THANKS SO MUCH.
THANK YOU.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: LAST WEEK,
MARISSA MULLER, A 34-YEAR-OLD
CALIFORNIA WOMAN COMPLETED A
SOLO, CROSS COUNTRY BICYCLE RIDE
COVERING 3,300 MILES IN 80 DAYS.
HER CUSTOM-MADE BIKE WAS
UNUSUAL-- POWERED IN PART BY
SOLAR ENERGY.
THE NEWSHOUR'S SASKIA DEMELKER
MET UP WITH MULLER HERE IN NEW
YORK.
>> MARISSA MULLER PEDALED ACROSS
AMERICA WITH A TEN POUND SOLAR
PANEL CONVERTING SUNLIGHT TO
ELECTRICITY.
>> THE PURPOSE WAS TO EXPOSE
SOLAR POWER TO EVERYBODY.
SOME HAVE SEEN THE BENEFITS BUT
I WANTED TO GET OUT THERE AND
ENGAGE EVERYBODY, SEE HOW SOLAR
POWERS WORKS.
>> THE MOTOR PROVIDES 40% OF THE
PEDAL-POWER WHICH MADE IT EASIER
FOR MULLER TO AVERAGE 17 MILES
AN HOUR AND COVER 70 MILES A
DAY.
>> IT WAS A BEAUTIFUL WAY TO SEE
THE COUNTRY.
FULL AND STUDY AND STILL FOCUS
ON WHAT WAS AHEAD.
>> THE BIKE WAS A
CONVERSATION-STARTER AND THAT
WAS THE POINT.
>> I THINK I ENGAGED AT LEAST
FIVE PEOPLE A DAY.
>> THROUGH HER HOME IN SAN
FRANCISCO THROUGH NATIONAL PARKS
AND ACROSS THE FAMED ROUTE 66.
SHE RODE PAST THE JEFFERSON
MEMORIAL AND THE GEORGE
WASHINGTON BRIDGE INTO NEW YORK
CITY.
SHE STOPPED TO SELL THE ROSES
AND TOOK DAYS OFF.
>> I STOPPED IN PLACE HE I FELT
CONNECTION WITH.
>> MULLER HAS MORE POSSIBILITY
FOR USING SOLAR ENERGY.
>> UPGRADE FROM TRADITIONAL
BIKES TO LESSER BIKES AND THE
EVOLUTION OF A BIKE ROUTE SOLAR
DOCKING STATION SO YOU COULD GET
TO WORK GET YOUR BIKE GIVE YOU A
WALK A CHARGE AND AT THE END OF
THE DAY HOP BACK ON AND GET BACK
HOME.
AND FINALLY TONIGHT FOR THE LAST
TIME A BUSINESSMAN HAS BEEN
ARRESTED FOR TRAFFICKING IN
SO-CALLED BLOOD DIAMONDS AND
ALLEGEDLY ENSLAVING PEOPLE TO
MINE THEM.
THE VICTIMS' RIGHTS GROUP HAS
ARRESTED MICHEL DELERE OR
HIS ACTIONS IN SIERRA LEONE 15
YEARS AGO.
FRIDAY NIGHT'S HOUSTON GAS
STATION OF A SHERIFF'S DEPUTY,
POLICE ARRESTED MILES YESTERDAY,
AFTER FINDING GUN CASINGS THAT
MATCHED THE CRIME SCENE.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.